README.md, before:

Conduits are an approach to the streaming data problem. It is meant as an
alternative to enumerators/iterators, hoping to address the same issues with
different trade-offs based on real-world experience with enumerators.

Current Documentation
===========================

The most up-to-date documentation is available as an appendix of the Yesod
book, at:
[http://www.yesodweb.com/book/conduits](http://www.yesodweb.com/book/conduits).
The remainder of the contents of this page are kept for historical reasons, to
give an idea of the original driving factors behind conduit. Note that plenty
of the descriptions of the current state of the package are inaccurate.

General Goal
===========================

Let's start by defining the goal of enumerators, iterators, and conduits. We
want a standard interface to represent streaming data from one point to
another, possibly modifying the data along the way.

This goal is also achieved by lazy I/O; the problem with lazy I/O, however, is
that of deterministic resource cleanup. That is to say, with lazy I/O, you
cannot be guaranteed that your file handles will be closed as soon as you have
finished reading data from them.

We want to keep the same properties of constant memory usage from lazy I/O, yet
have guarantees that scarce resources will be freed as early as possible.

Enumerator
===========================

__Note__: This is biased towards John Millikin's enumerator package, as that is
the package with which I have the most familiarity.

The concept of an enumerator is fairly simple. We have an `Iteratee` which
"consumes" data. It keeps its state while being fed data by an `Enumerator`.
The `Enumerator` will feed data a few chunks at a time to an `Iteratee`,
transforming the `Iteratee`'s state at each call. Additionally, there is an
`Enumeratee` that acts as both an `Enumerator` and `Iteratee`.

As a result, there are a few changes to code structure that need to take place
in order to fully leverage enumerators:

*    The `Enumerator`s control code flow. This is an Inversion of Control (IoC)
     technique.
     
     __Practical ramification__: `Iteratee` code can be more difficult to
     structure. Note that this is a subjective opinion, noted by many newcomers to
     the enumerator paradigm.

     __Requirement__: Nothing specific, likely addressing the requirements
     below will automatically solve this.

*    `Iteratee`s are not able to allocate scarce resources. Since they do not
     have any control of the flow of the program, they cannot guarantee that
     the resources will be released, especially in the presence of exceptions.

     __Practical ramification__: There is no way to create an `iterFile`, which
     will stream data into a file. Instead, you must allocate a file handle
     before entering the `Iteratee` and pass that in. In some cases, such an
     approach would mean file handles are kept open too long.

     __Clarification__: It is certainly *possible* to write iterFile, but there
     are no guarantees that it will close the allocated `Handle`, since the calling
     `Enumerator` may throw an exception before sending an `EOF` to the `Iteratee`.

     __Requirement__: We need a solution which would allow code something like
     the following to correctly open and close file handles, even in the presence
     of exceptions.

         run $ enumFile "input.txt" $$ iterFile "output.txt"

*    None of this plays nicely with monad transformers, though this does not
     seem to be an inherent problem with enumerators, instead with the current
     library.

     __Practical ramification__: You cannot enumerate a file when running in a
     `ReaderT IO`.

    __Requirement__: The following pseudo-code should work:

         runReaderT (run $ enumFile "input" $$ iterFile "output") ()

*    Instead of passing around a `Handle` to pull data from, your code should
     live inside an `Iteratee`. This makes it difficult and/or impossible to
     interleave two different sources.

     __Practical ramification__: Even with libraries designed to interoperate
     (like http-enumerator and warp), it is not possible to create a proper
     streaming HTTP proxy.

     __Note__: This might actually be possible using the "nested iteratee"
     technique. I would still posit that this is far too complicated a
     solution to the problem.

     __Requirement__: It should be possible to pass around some type of producer
     which will be called piecemeal. For example, the request body in Warp should be
     expressible as:

         data Request = Request
             { ...
             , requestBody :: Enumerator ByteString IO ()
             }

     Applications should be able to do something like:

         bs <- requestBody req $$ takeBytes 10
         someAction bs
         rest <- requestBody req $$ takeRest
         finalAction rest

     Note that there may be other approaches to solving the same problem, this
     is just one possibility.

*    While the concepts are simple, actually writing low-level Iteratee code is
     very complex. This in turn intimidates users from adopting the approach.
     Again, this is a subjective measurement.

     __Requirement__: Newcomers should be able to easily understand how to use
     the package, and with a little more training feel comfortable writing their own
     producers/consumers.

Conduits
===========================

Conduits attempt to provide a similar high-level API to enumerators, while
providing a drastically different low-level implementation. The first question
to visit is: why does the enumerator need to control flow of the program? The
main purpose is to ensure that resources are released properly. But this in
fact solved only *half* the problem; iteratees still cannot release resources.

ResourceT
---------------------------

So our first issue to address is to create a new way to deal with resource
allocation. We represent this as a monad transformer, `ResourceT`. It works as
follows:

* You can register a cleanup action, which will return a `ReleaseKey`.

* If you pass your `ReleaseKey` to the `release` function, your action will be
  called automatically, and your action will be unregistered.

* When the monad is exited (via `runRelease`), all remaining registered actions
  will be called.

* All of this is provided in an exception-safe manner.

For example, you would be able to open a file handle, and then register an
action to close the file handle. In your code, you would call `release` on your
`ReleaseKey` as soon as you reach the end of the contents you are streaming. If
that code is never reached, the file handle will be released when the monad
terminates.

Source
---------------------------

Now that we have a way to deal with resources, we can take a radically
different approach to production of data streams. Instead of a push system,
where the enumerators sends data down the pipeline, we have a pull system,
where data is requested from the source. Additionally, a source allows
buffering of input data, so data can be "pushed back" onto the source to be
available for a later call.

Sink
---------------------------

A `Sink` is the corollary to an `Iteratee`. It takes a stream of data, and can
return a result, consisting of leftover input and an output. Like an
`Iteratee`, a `Sink` provides a `Monad` instance, which allows easy chaining
together of `Sink`s.

However, a big difference is that your code needn't live in the `Sink` monad.
You can easily pass around your sources and connect them to different `Sink`s.
As a practical example, when the Web Application Interface (WAI) is translated
to conduits, the application lives in the `ResourceT IO` monad, and the
`Request` value contains a `requestBody` record, which is a `Source IO
ByteString`.

Conduit
---------------------------

Conduits are simply functions that take a stream of input data and return
leftover input as well as a stream of output data. Conduits are far simpler to
implement than their corollary, `Enumeratee`s.

Connecting
---------------------------

While you can directly pull data from a `Source`, or directly push to a `Sink`, the easiest approach is to use the built-in connect operators. These follow the naming convention from the enumerator package, e.g.:

    sourceFile "myfile.txt" $$ sinkFile "mycopy.txt"
    sourceFile "myfile.txt" $= uppercase {- a conduit -} $$ sinkFile "mycopy.txt"
    fromList [1..10] $$ Data.Conduit.List.map (+ 1) =$ fold (+) 0

Trade-offs
===========================

Overall, the approach achieves the goals I had hoped for. The main downside in
its current form is its reliance on mutable data. Instead of having an
`Iteratee` return a new `Iteratee`, thereby provide an illusion of mutability,
in conduit the sources and sinks must maintain their state internally. As a
result, code must live in IO and usually use something like an IORef to keep
track of the current state.

I believe this to be an acceptable trade-off, since:

1. Virtually all conduit code will be performing I/O, so staying in the `IO`
   monad is reasonable.
2. By using `monad-control`, conduit can work with any monad *based* on `IO`,
   meaning all standard transformers (except `ContT`) can be used.
3. Enumerator experience has shown that the majority of the time, you construct
   `Iteratee`s by using built-in functions, such as fold and map. Therefore,
   the complication of tracking mutable state will usually be abstracted from
   users.

Another minor point is that, in order to provide an efficient `Monad` instance,
the `Sink` type is complicated with tracking two cases: a `Sink` which expects
data and one which does not. As expressed in point (3) above, this should not
have a major impact for users.

Finally, since most `Source`s and `Sink`s begin their life by allocating some
mutable variable, both types allow some arbitrary monadic action to be run
before actual processing begins. The monad (et al) instances and connect
functions are all built to run this action once and then continue operation.

Status
===========================

This is currently no more than a proof-of-concept, to see the differences
between enumerators and conduits for practical problems. This may serve as a
basis for WAI and Yesod in the future, but that will only be after careful
vetting of the idea. Your input is greatly appreciated!

Notes
===========================

This is just a collection of my personal notes, completely unorganized.

*   In enumerator, it's relatively easy to combined multiple `Iteratee`s into
    an `Enumeratee`. The equivalent (turning `Sink`s into a `Conduit`) is
    harder.  See, for example, chunking in http-conduit. Perhaps this can be
    improved with a better `sequence`.

*   Names and operators are very long right now. Is that a feature or a bug?

*   Should we use Vector in place of lists?

*   It might be worth transitioning to RegionT. Will the extra type parameter
    scare people away?

*   Perhaps the whole BSource/BConduit concept doesn't need to be exposed to
    the user. Advantage of exposing: it makes it obvious at the type level that
    a source/conduit can be reused, and possibly more efficient implementations
    (no double buffering). Disadvantage: more functions to implement/user to
    keep track of, so harder to use.

*   I dislike the travesty which is `type FilePath = [Char]`, so I'm using the
    system-filepath package. I've used it for a lot of internal code at work,
    and it performs wonderfully. If anyone is concerned about this approach,
    let me know.

*   Should we rename ConduitM to Conduit (et al), and then give Conduit a name
    like ConduitRaw? After all, users interact with the current "M" versions
    more often than anything else.

Commit message:

Updated README.md to point to Data.Conduit tutorial

README.md, after:

Conduits are an approach to the streaming data problem. It is meant as an
alternative to enumerators/iterators, hoping to address the same issues with
different trade-offs based on real-world experience with enumerators.

Current Documentation
===========================

The most up-to-date documentation is available in the `Data.Conduit` module
itself, which is [available for reading on
Hackage](http://hackage.haskell.org/packages/archive/conduit/latest/doc/html/Data-Conduit.html).

The remainder of the contents of this page are kept for historical reasons, to
give an idea of the original driving factors behind conduit. Note that plenty
of the descriptions of the current state of the package are inaccurate.

General Goal
===========================

Let's start by defining the goal of enumerators, iterators, and conduits. We
want a standard interface to represent streaming data from one point to
another, possibly modifying the data along the way.

This goal is also achieved by lazy I/O; the problem with lazy I/O, however, is
that of deterministic resource cleanup. That is to say, with lazy I/O, you
cannot be guaranteed that your file handles will be closed as soon as you have
finished reading data from them.

We want to keep the same properties of constant memory usage from lazy I/O, yet
have guarantees that scarce resources will be freed as early as possible.

Enumerator
===========================

__Note__: This is biased towards John Millikin's enumerator package, as that is
the package with which I have the most familiarity.

The concept of an enumerator is fairly simple. We have an `Iteratee` which
"consumes" data. It keeps its state while being fed data by an `Enumerator`.
The `Enumerator` will feed data a few chunks at a time to an `Iteratee`,
transforming the `Iteratee`'s state at each call. Additionally, there is an
`Enumeratee` that acts as both an `Enumerator` and `Iteratee`.

As a result, there are a few changes to code structure that need to take place
in order to fully leverage enumerators:

*    The `Enumerator`s control code flow. This is an Inversion of Control (IoC)
     technique.
     
     __Practical ramification__: `Iteratee` code can be more difficult to
     structure. Note that this is a subjective opinion, noted by many newcomers to
     the enumerator paradigm.

     __Requirement__: Nothing specific, likely addressing the requirements
     below will automatically solve this.

*    `Iteratee`s are not able to allocate scarce resources. Since they do not
     have any control of the flow of the program, they cannot guarantee that
     the resources will be released, especially in the presence of exceptions.

     __Practical ramification__: There is no way to create an `iterFile`, which
     will stream data into a file. Instead, you must allocate a file handle
     before entering the `Iteratee` and pass that in. In some cases, such an
     approach would mean file handles are kept open too long.

     __Clarification__: It is certainly *possible* to write iterFile, but there
     are no guarantees that it will close the allocated `Handle`, since the calling
     `Enumerator` may throw an exception before sending an `EOF` to the `Iteratee`.

     __Requirement__: We need a solution which would allow code something like
     the following to correctly open and close file handles, even in the presence
     of exceptions.

         run $ enumFile "input.txt" $$ iterFile "output.txt"

*    None of this plays nicely with monad transformers, though this does not
     seem to be an inherent problem with enumerators, instead with the current
     library.

     __Practical ramification__: You cannot enumerate a file when running in a
     `ReaderT IO`.

    __Requirement__: The following pseudo-code should work:

         runReaderT (run $ enumFile "input" $$ iterFile "output") ()

*    Instead of passing around a `Handle` to pull data from, your code should
     live inside an `Iteratee`. This makes it difficult and/or impossible to
     interleave two different sources.

     __Practical ramification__: Even with libraries designed to interoperate
     (like http-enumerator and warp), it is not possible to create a proper
     streaming HTTP proxy.

     __Note__: This might actually be possible using the "nested iteratee"
     technique. I would still posit that this is far too complicated a
     solution to the problem.

     __Requirement__: It should be possible to pass around some type of producer
     which will be called piecemeal. For example, the request body in Warp should be
     expressible as:

         data Request = Request
             { ...
             , requestBody :: Enumerator ByteString IO ()
             }

     Applications should be able to do something like:

         bs <- requestBody req $$ takeBytes 10
         someAction bs
         rest <- requestBody req $$ takeRest
         finalAction rest

     Note that there may be other approaches to solving the same problem, this
     is just one possibility.

*    While the concepts are simple, actually writing low-level Iteratee code is
     very complex. This in turn intimidates users from adopting the approach.
     Again, this is a subjective measurement.

     __Requirement__: Newcomers should be able to easily understand how to use
     the package, and with a little more training feel comfortable writing their own
     producers/consumers.

Conduits
===========================

Conduits attempt to provide a similar high-level API to enumerators, while
providing a drastically different low-level implementation. The first question
to visit is: why does the enumerator need to control flow of the program? The
main purpose is to ensure that resources are released properly. But this in
fact solved only *half* the problem; iteratees still cannot release resources.

ResourceT
---------------------------

So our first issue to address is to create a new way to deal with resource
allocation. We represent this as a monad transformer, `ResourceT`. It works as
follows:

* You can register a cleanup action, which will return a `ReleaseKey`.

* If you pass your `ReleaseKey` to the `release` function, your action will be
  called automatically, and your action will be unregistered.

* When the monad is exited (via `runRelease`), all remaining registered actions
  will be called.

* All of this is provided in an exception-safe manner.

For example, you would be able to open a file handle, and then register an
action to close the file handle. In your code, you would call `release` on your
`ReleaseKey` as soon as you reach the end of the contents you are streaming. If
that code is never reached, the file handle will be released when the monad
terminates.

Source
---------------------------

Now that we have a way to deal with resources, we can take a radically
different approach to production of data streams. Instead of a push system,
where the enumerators sends data down the pipeline, we have a pull system,
where data is requested from the source. Additionally, a source allows
buffering of input data, so data can be "pushed back" onto the source to be
available for a later call.

Sink
---------------------------

A `Sink` is the corollary to an `Iteratee`. It takes a stream of data, and can
return a result, consisting of leftover input and an output. Like an
`Iteratee`, a `Sink` provides a `Monad` instance, which allows easy chaining
together of `Sink`s.

However, a big difference is that your code needn't live in the `Sink` monad.
You can easily pass around your sources and connect them to different `Sink`s.
As a practical example, when the Web Application Interface (WAI) is translated
to conduits, the application lives in the `ResourceT IO` monad, and the
`Request` value contains a `requestBody` record, which is a `Source IO
ByteString`.

Conduit
---------------------------

Conduits are simply functions that take a stream of input data and return
leftover input as well as a stream of output data. Conduits are far simpler to
implement than their corollary, `Enumeratee`s.

Connecting
---------------------------

While you can directly pull data from a `Source`, or directly push to a `Sink`, the easiest approach is to use the built-in connect operators. These follow the naming convention from the enumerator package, e.g.:

    sourceFile "myfile.txt" $$ sinkFile "mycopy.txt"
    sourceFile "myfile.txt" $= uppercase {- a conduit -} $$ sinkFile "mycopy.txt"
    fromList [1..10] $$ Data.Conduit.List.map (+ 1) =$ fold (+) 0

Trade-offs
===========================

Overall, the approach achieves the goals I had hoped for. The main downside in
its current form is its reliance on mutable data. Instead of having an
`Iteratee` return a new `Iteratee`, thereby provide an illusion of mutability,
in conduit the sources and sinks must maintain their state internally. As a
result, code must live in IO and usually use something like an IORef to keep
track of the current state.

I believe this to be an acceptable trade-off, since:

1. Virtually all conduit code will be performing I/O, so staying in the `IO`
   monad is reasonable.
2. By using `monad-control`, conduit can work with any monad *based* on `IO`,
   meaning all standard transformers (except `ContT`) can be used.
3. Enumerator experience has shown that the majority of the time, you construct
   `Iteratee`s by using built-in functions, such as fold and map. Therefore,
   the complication of tracking mutable state will usually be abstracted from
   users.

Another minor point is that, in order to provide an efficient `Monad` instance,
the `Sink` type is complicated with tracking two cases: a `Sink` which expects
data and one which does not. As expressed in point (3) above, this should not
have a major impact for users.

Finally, since most `Source`s and `Sink`s begin their life by allocating some
mutable variable, both types allow some arbitrary monadic action to be run
before actual processing begins. The monad (et al) instances and connect
functions are all built to run this action once and then continue operation.

Status
===========================

This is currently no more than a proof-of-concept, to see the differences
between enumerators and conduits for practical problems. This may serve as a
basis for WAI and Yesod in the future, but that will only be after careful
vetting of the idea. Your input is greatly appreciated!

Notes
===========================

This is just a collection of my personal notes, completely unorganized.

*   In enumerator, it's relatively easy to combined multiple `Iteratee`s into
    an `Enumeratee`. The equivalent (turning `Sink`s into a `Conduit`) is
    harder.  See, for example, chunking in http-conduit. Perhaps this can be
    improved with a better `sequence`.

*   Names and operators are very long right now. Is that a feature or a bug?

*   Should we use Vector in place of lists?

*   It might be worth transitioning to RegionT. Will the extra type parameter
    scare people away?

*   Perhaps the whole BSource/BConduit concept doesn't need to be exposed to
    the user. Advantage of exposing: it makes it obvious at the type level that
    a source/conduit can be reused, and possibly more efficient implementations
    (no double buffering). Disadvantage: more functions to implement/user to
    keep track of, so harder to use.

*   I dislike the travesty which is `type FilePath = [Char]`, so I'm using the
    system-filepath package. I've used it for a lot of internal code at work,
    and it performs wonderfully. If anyone is concerned about this approach,
    let me know.

*   Should we rename ConduitM to Conduit (et al), and then give Conduit a name
    like ConduitRaw? After all, users interact with the current "M" versions
    more often than anything else.
